README.md, before:

# CPE551_Group_Project_F25

**Project Title:**
Estimating Building Energy Usage, Temperature, and Humidity based on Occupancy, Building Type, and Time of Day

**Student Names & emails:**
Suraj Bose - sbose5@stevens.edu
Nicole Giardino - ngiardin@stevens.edu

**Problem Description:**

  A dataset (csv) is provided which consists of 7,200 records with detailed hourly (00:00 to 23:00) observations related to building energy consumption as temperature, humidity, building type, and occupancy changes. These observations are tied to 20 buildings with differing IDs, B001-B020, and the study was conducted for two full weeks. The team sets out to develop a python program capable of predicting the energy consumption of buildings under different conditions.

**Program Structure:**

  The first class that is defined and used is Building, which sets up the entire dataset using PANDAS. It stores lists of all the data for future use in the system. The next class, BuildingCalc, has a composition relationship with Building and calculates estimates for the data that can be acquired from the group's dataset: energy, temperature, and humidity. Here, time of day and temperature in Fahrenheit columns are made. A filter is created in this class for building type, occupancy level, and time period. This filter returns the values needed from the dataset, including the average, minimum, and maximum of the three values defined previously. A generator function is also defined to show the user rows that match their input criteria for building type, occupancy level, and time of day.
  
  In the main function, the user is prompted whether they would like to see the information summary for all buildings across the dataset using a while True loop. Then, a test section demonstrates the code's functionality by looking at the first few rows of the dataset, and also with a specific instance of the dataset. Next, a while True loop is set up to ask the user to enter the specific data they would like to see (building type, occupancy level, and time of day). The program then uses these inputs to print the values returned from BuildingCalc. These are displayed to the user through readable sentences.
  
  Then, the program loops through the filtered rows, appending each data point to its respective list of values, where a DataFrame is created. The list values are then sorted in place, and finally, using matplotlib, all of the data points (as well as horizontal asymptotes for the mean, max, and min) are plotted for the temperature, humidity, and energy for the user's entered conditions. Finally, a graph is displayed showing the three values on top of one another.
  
  There is also a provided Pytest file. By running this file, users can gain an understanding of which data types this program accepts and which it does not. The first test checks whether a given time frame correctly matches a corresponding TimeOfDay, and this test passes when using fake_data and the predefined test timestamps. The next two tests attempt to validate the data files, "fake_data" and "fail_fake_data" against the expected numeric_columns. The first of these tests passes, while the second does not, as "fail_fake_data" includes data containing string values, which is not the correct data type for this program.

**How to Use:**

  Upon hitting the run button, the user is prompted with the message: "Enter 'ALL' to see dataset stats ('X' or 'x' to exit)". Typing 'ALL' will display the total records for the dataset (7200 in this case) as well as the average energy use, temperature, and humidity across all data points. Once 'X' is entered, the user is provided with a test that demonstrates the functionality of the code. This test shows the first few rows of the DataFrame, with the added columns TimeOfDay and Temperature (F). Then, a test function is displayed showing the average energy, temperature, and humidity for the pre-defined test parameters: Industrial for Building, High for Occupancy, and afternoon for Time of Day.
  
  Next, the user is prompted with a series of questions allowing them to choose the results they would like to see displayed. The first question asks: "Enter a building type (1 - Industrial, 2 - Commercial, 3 - Residential, 4 - Educational) ('X' or 'x' to exit)". This allows the user to enter either the corresponding number or the name of the building type they would like to see (the numbers are included for additional user ease). The next question prompts the user about occupancy level (1 - High, 2 - Medium, 3 - Low). Finally, they are prompted about the time of day (1 - Morning, 2 - Afternoon, 3 - Evening, 4 - Night).
  
  After all of these questions are answered, the user is given a statement confirming the entries they provided. Then, they can read a series of sentences telling them the range (minimum and maximum values) and average for temperature, humidity, and energy. They are also provided with all rows that match their criteria in chronological order. Underneath, three graphs are displayed, one for each of the components, temperature energy and humidity, with horizontal asymptotes showing where the average, minimum, and maximum values fell along the graph. A fourth graph is also displayed, showing all three components on top of one another for further visualization. The user is allowed to enter in as many combinations of these features as desired, and can exit the program by entering in 'X'.
  
  The user can also run Pytest. Upon navigating to the "test_FinalProject.py" file, they can hit run, and then type "pytest" into the terminal directly. Running Pytest will execute all provided test cases and display which tests pass and which fail. In this case, three tests are collected and run. Two of the tests pass successfully, while one test fails as expected. The failing test uses "fail_fake_data", which contains string values in columns that are expected to be numeric. This results in a TypeError during the temperature conversion calculation, showing that the program does not accept incorrect data types and flags invalid inputs as desired. 

**Contributions of Each TeamMate:**

**Suraj:**
- Created the class - buildingCalc. Contains constructors, attributes. 
- Function under buildingCalc to calculate estimates
- Exceptions: ValueError if invalid building selected inside the while loop. ValueError if no data is available after applying the filters.
- Pytest: Created three tests: 1 checks the timeframe based on timeofday. The other two check if the data columns of temp, humidity, and energy usage are all numbers
- I/O reading from file/database: Data is loaded to df using Pandas
- Special funtions: Updated filter function (boolean indexing) to use filter() and lambda instead
- Mutable/unmutable objects: Pandas Dataframe & buildings dictionary are mutable. Strings & Tuples are immutable. Added tuple for TIMEOFDAY
- Added in operator overloading with len() inside the Building Class.
- Generator function row_check in buildingcalc class

**Nicole:**
- Built original class with __init__ to initialize attributes, an instance method to update data, and a __str__ to return data as a string
- Matplotlib to visualize data: Created 4 plots per run that update based on users inputs
- For loop to group dataset by building ID
- while loops were created to let the user choose what building stats they want to see; this includes a ValueError Exception if an invalid building is input
- Created the user interface and logic for the while loops
- Nested if statements within the while loop
- Wrote the README 
- Comprehension: Used within BuildingCalc to process temperature data and put it in Fahrenheit
- Used __name__ for the main script code
- Used __str__ for making the data printed more readable and understandable to the user
- Split the classes into .py files from the original .ipynb

**Both:**
- Built in library/module: Filter, lambda, len(), and print() are examples of built in modules
- Advanced libraries: Pandas and matplotlib are used
- Docstring & meaningful comments for each class/function

Commit message:

Update usage instructions in README.md
Clarified usage instructions and project details in README.

README.md, after:

# CPE551_Group_Project_F25

**Project Title:**
Estimating Building Energy Usage, Temperature, and Humidity based on Occupancy, Building Type, and Time of Day

**Student Names & emails:**
Suraj Bose - sbose5@stevens.edu
Nicole Giardino - ngiardin@stevens.edu

**Problem Description:**

  A dataset (csv) is provided which consists of 7,200 records with detailed hourly (00:00 to 23:00) observations related to building energy consumption as temperature, humidity, building type, and occupancy changes. These observations are tied to 20 buildings with differing IDs, B001-B020, and the study was conducted for two full weeks. The team sets out to develop a python program capable of predicting the energy consumption of buildings under different conditions.

**Program Structure:**

  The first class that is defined and used is Building, which sets up the entire dataset using PANDAS. It stores lists of all the data for future use in the system. The next class, BuildingCalc, has a composition relationship with Building and calculates estimates for the data that can be acquired from the group's dataset: energy, temperature, and humidity. Here, time of day and temperature in Fahrenheit columns are made. A filter is created in this class for building type, occupancy level, and time period. This filter returns the values needed from the dataset, including the average, minimum, and maximum of the three values defined previously. A generator function is also defined to show the user rows that match their input criteria for building type, occupancy level, and time of day.
  
  In the main function, the user is prompted whether they would like to see the information summary for all buildings across the dataset using a while True loop. Then, a test section demonstrates the code's functionality by looking at the first few rows of the dataset, and also with a specific instance of the dataset. Next, a while True loop is set up to ask the user to enter the specific data they would like to see (building type, occupancy level, and time of day). The program then uses these inputs to print the values returned from BuildingCalc. These are displayed to the user through readable sentences.
  
  Then, the program loops through the filtered rows, appending each data point to its respective list of values, where a DataFrame is created. The list values are then sorted in place, and finally, using matplotlib, all of the data points (as well as horizontal asymptotes for the mean, max, and min) are plotted for the temperature, humidity, and energy for the user's entered conditions. Finally, a graph is displayed showing the three values on top of one another.
  
  There is also a provided Pytest file. By running this file, users can gain an understanding of which data types this program accepts and which it does not. The first test checks whether a given time frame correctly matches a corresponding TimeOfDay, and this test passes when using fake_data and the predefined test timestamps. The next two tests attempt to validate the data files, "fake_data" and "fail_fake_data" against the expected numeric_columns. The first of these tests passes, while the second does not, as "fail_fake_data" includes data containing string values, which is not the correct data type for this program.

**How to Use:**

  The main code file that will be used for this project is labeled as "Bose_Giardino_FinalProject". Upon hitting the run button, the user is prompted with the message: "Enter 'ALL' to see dataset stats ('X' or 'x' to exit)". Typing 'ALL' will display the total records for the dataset (7200 in this case) as well as the average energy use, temperature, and humidity across all data points. Once 'X' is entered, the user is provided with a test that demonstrates the functionality of the code. This test shows the first few rows of the DataFrame, with the added columns TimeOfDay and Temperature (F). Then, a test function is displayed showing the average energy, temperature, and humidity for the pre-defined test parameters: Industrial for Building, High for Occupancy, and afternoon for Time of Day.
  
  Next, the user is prompted with a series of questions allowing them to choose the results they would like to see displayed. The first question asks: "Enter a building type (1 - Industrial, 2 - Commercial, 3 - Residential, 4 - Educational) ('X' or 'x' to exit)". This allows the user to enter either the corresponding number or the name of the building type they would like to see (the numbers are included for additional user ease). The next question prompts the user about occupancy level (1 - High, 2 - Medium, 3 - Low). Finally, they are prompted about the time of day (1 - Morning, 2 - Afternoon, 3 - Evening, 4 - Night).
  
  After all of these questions are answered, the user is given a statement confirming the entries they provided. Then, they can read a series of sentences telling them the range (minimum and maximum values) and average for temperature, humidity, and energy. They are also provided with all rows that match their criteria in chronological order. Underneath, three graphs are displayed, one for each of the components, temperature energy and humidity, with horizontal asymptotes showing where the average, minimum, and maximum values fell along the graph. A fourth graph is also displayed, showing all three components on top of one another for further visualization. The user is allowed to enter in as many combinations of these features as desired, and can exit the program by entering in 'X'.
  
  The user can also run Pytest. Upon navigating to the "test_FinalProject.py" file, they can hit run, and then type "pytest" into the terminal directly. Running Pytest will execute all provided test cases and display which tests pass and which fail. In this case, three tests are collected and run. Two of the tests pass successfully, while one test fails as expected. The failing test uses "fail_fake_data", which contains string values in columns that are expected to be numeric. This results in a TypeError during the temperature conversion calculation, showing that the program does not accept incorrect data types and flags invalid inputs as desired. 

**Contributions of Each TeamMate:**

**Suraj:**
- Created the class - buildingCalc. Contains constructors, attributes. 
- Function under buildingCalc to calculate estimates
- Exceptions: ValueError if invalid building selected inside the while loop. ValueError if no data is available after applying the filters.
- Pytest: Created three tests: 1 checks the timeframe based on timeofday. The other two check if the data columns of temp, humidity, and energy usage are all numbers
- I/O reading from file/database: Data is loaded to df using Pandas
- Special funtions: Updated filter function (boolean indexing) to use filter() and lambda instead
- Mutable/unmutable objects: Pandas Dataframe & buildings dictionary are mutable. Strings & Tuples are immutable. Added tuple for TIMEOFDAY
- Added in operator overloading with len() inside the Building Class.
- Generator function row_check in buildingcalc class

**Nicole:**
- Built original class with __init__ to initialize attributes, an instance method to update data, and a __str__ to return data as a string
- Matplotlib to visualize data: Created 4 plots per run that update based on users inputs
- For loop to group dataset by building ID
- while loops were created to let the user choose what building stats they want to see; this includes a ValueError Exception if an invalid building is input
- Created the user interface and logic for the while loops
- Nested if statements within the while loop
- Wrote the README 
- Comprehension: Used within BuildingCalc to process temperature data and put it in Fahrenheit
- Used __name__ for the main script code
- Used __str__ for making the data printed more readable and understandable to the user
- Split the classes into .py files from the original .ipynb

**Both:**
- Built in library/module: Filter, lambda, len(), and print() are examples of built in modules
- Advanced libraries: Pandas and matplotlib are used
- Docstring & meaningful comments for each class/function
